FLIP 288: Simple String Interpolation (#289)
onflow/flips: cadence/20240923-simple-string-interpolation.md

In comparison, string interpolation can be implemented efficiently, and will thus also will lead to the user benefit of being less costly in terms of computation and memory usage.

## Design Proposal

The proposed syntax for the string-literal with interpolation looks like follows:

```swift
"Variable = \(someVar)"
```

The main constraint is backward compatibility, existing Cadence 1.0 code cannot be affected. This change is backwards compatible because `\(` is not currently a valid escape character. 

For this initial proposal there will be several limitations on `someVar`:
- `someVar` will only be variable references with ability to be extended to expressions in the future
- `someVar` must support the built-in function `toString()` meaning it must be either a `String`, `Number`, `Address`, `Character`, `Bool` or `Path`.  

This is still useful for the first iteration since there are easy workarounds for these limitations such as extracting expressions into local variables.

### Drawbacks

> None.

Reviewer: Nit: One little drawback I see is that `\(` is a bit of an uncommon escape sequence for string interpolation. I haven't seen a language that uses that. I don't think this really matters, but I do feel like it's a bit easier to guess the correct syntax or scan the code if using a common syntax (which I'm not sure is possible given backward compatibility constraints as mentioned).

---
status: draft 
flip: 288
authors: Raymond Zhang (raymond.zhang@flowfoundation.org)
sponsor: Supun Setunga (supun.setunga@flowfoundation.org) 
updated: 2024-09-23
---

# FLIP 288: Simple String Interpolation

## Objective

This FLIP proposes adding support for simple string interpolation limited to identifiers only (no support for full expressions).

## Motivation

Currently Cadence has no support for string interpolation. It is convenient for developers to be able to inline variables in strings as opposed to the current solution of applying `concat` repeatedly. 

In general many languages support string interpolation for readability and ease-of-use. 

## User Benefit

> Developers can avoid repeatedly using `concat` to generate strings which will simplify code and readability.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention the performance improvement here: 

Repeated concatenation is inefficient, as each concatenation results in an intermediate/temporary result, leading to an allocation and associated metering (computation and memory usage).

In comparison, string interpolation can be implemented efficiently, and will thus also will lead to the user benefit of being less costly in terms of computation and memory usage.

Author: Added.

## Design Proposal

> The main constraint is backward compatibility, existing Cadence 1.0 code cannot be affected. The proposed solution follows the syntax of swift as below:

Reviewer 2: Maybe swap the order: First, describe what is being proposed, and then explain why the proposed design is a good idea (e.g. it satisfies backward-compatibility, and how)

> The main constraint is backward compatibility, existing Cadence 1.0 code cannot be affected. The proposed solution follows the syntax of swift as below:

Reviewer 3: Don't need to say we took Swift's syntax as-is. It's more like we got inspiration from the syntaxes of existing languages, including Swift, and picked a one that is more suitable for Cadence.
```suggestion
The main constraint is backward compatibility, existing Cadence 1.0 code cannot be affected. The proposed syntax for the string-literal with interpolation looks like follows:
```

Author: Done.

```swift
"Variable = \(someVar)"
```

This change is backwards compatible because `\(` is not currently a valid escape character. 

For this initial proposal there will be several limitations on `someVar`:

> - `someVar` will only be variable references with ability to be extended to expressions in the future

Reviewer 3: If we are going to extend this for other expression in future, would it be better to pick a notation and would less likely to conflict with other expressions. For example parenthesis are more commonly used in expressions (e.g: function calls, parenthesized expressions, etc.), than curly-braces (only in dictionary literal and inlined functions - both are rarely used). So if we put curly-braces as to mark the start/end of the interpolation (i.e: `"hello, \{name()}`), there's less chance it will collide with other expressions.

Regardless of which one is picked, the amount of work for the implementation would be the same. But most-common use-cases would be efficient, and less error-prone.

Reviewer 2: How would the proposed notation conflict for more complex expressions? For example, an invocation expression like in your example would just be `"hello, \(name())"`. I don't quite see how a different set of delimiting characters, like e.g. curly braces, would help.

Reviewer 3: So yeah, I don't quite know what the implementation would look like eventually, but in an expression like `hello, \(name())` or `\{{"name": "Supun"}}`, I assume that it may need to keep track of parenthesis/braces count or some parser-mode that recursively can distinguish between the closing parenthesis/brace of an expression vs the closing parenthesis/brace of the interpolation, and properly switch back to Lexing the remainder of the string. I'm not sure how accurately/efficiently this can be done. That's why I suggested to use parentheses instead.
Like I said, it doesn't solve the problem for nested parenthesis (only shift it to a separate place), but, If it turned out to be impossible to accurately distinguish the expression's curly-brace and the end of the interpolation, then we have the option to not allow curly-braces inside the interpolation at all. But that would still allow the most common use-cases, like function calls.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, the lexer probably needs to keep track of the nesting level of whatever delimiter that is chosen (e.g. `(`) 👍

Reviewer 2: Just as an aside: Here's how Swift lexes it: https://github.com/swiftlang/swift/blob/main/lib/Parse/Lexer.cpp#L1455

> - `someVar` must support the built-in function `toString()` meaning it must be either a String, Number, Address or Character.  

Reviewer 2: Maybe also add support for `Bool` and `Path`:

```suggestion
- `someVar` must support the built-in function `toString()` meaning it must be either a `String`, `Number`, `Address`, `Character`, `Bool`, or `Path`.
```

This is still useful for the first iteration since there are easy workarounds for these limitations such as extracting expressions into local variables.

### Drawbacks

None.

### Alternatives Considered

String interpolation is preferred over a formatting function (such as `printf`) for the following reasons:

> - Formatting is error prone (e.g. passing a `String` to `%d`)

Reviewer 2: Maybe expand a bit on how string formatting is error prone.

For example: 
- Type of argument passed to formatting facility might not match format specifier (e.g. value of type `String` is passed to a format specifier for type `Integer`, like `%d`)
- Number of arguments passed to formatting might not match number of placeholders in format specifier (e.g. passed too many or too few more arguments)
- When there are many placeholders in the format string, the order of the arguments might get mixed up easily

In most implementations of string formatting facilities, like when it is implemented as a normal function, these errors can not be detected statically, but only at run-time.

However, some languages have formatting facilities that avoid some of the problems noted above, by statically checking the format specifier and the argument list. For example, Rust's `format!` macro does that.

Maybe also discuss alternatives considered for string interpolation.

For example:
- In some languages string interpolation is only performed in certain kinds of string literals. For example:
  - Python has "f-strings", where an `f` prefix of the string literal indicates interpolation (e.g.  `f"Hello, {name}"`). Placeholders are surrounded by curly braces
  - JavaScript has template strings/literals, where backticks indicate string interpolation (e.g. `` `Hello, {name}` ``). Placeholders are surrounded by curly braces
  - Scala has "s-strings", where an `s` prefix of the string literal indicates interpolation (e.g. `s"Hello, $name"`). Placeholders are indicated with a `$` and do not need to be surrounded
  - Ruby has string interpolation in normal string literals (e.g. `"Hello, #{name}"`). Placeholders are indicated by `#` and surrounded by curly braces

As can be seen, there's no clear "standard". The proposed design leverages the fact that escaping already exists `\`, and parentheses naturally surround values in expressions. Therefore, no new syntax is introduced (e.g. no literal prefix, no placeholder indicator, no new expression surrounding characters)

- There are many languages which moved from traditional formatting to string interpolation (e.g. Python)

### Performance Implications

> None, non-interpolated strings should not be affected.

Reviewer 2: In addition to no negative performance implications on existing strings, maybe mention that the proposed design of string interpolation has a much better performance compared to repeated string concatenation.

### Dependencies

None.

### Engineering Impact

This change should be simple to implement. 

### Best Practices

It may be preferred to use string interpolation over concat once implemented.

### Compatibility

Proposed changes are backwards compatible. 

### User Impact

This is a feature addition, no impact. 

## Related Issues

https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/3579

## Prior Art

- https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/stringsandcharacters/#String-Interpolation

> - https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/inputoutput.html#formatted-string-literals

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention https://peps.python.org/pep-0498/ here, which has a rational and useful comparison to existing string formatting facilities.

flip: 288
authors: Raymond Zhang (raymond.zhang@flowfoundation.org)
sponsor: Supun Setunga (supun.setunga@flowfoundation.org) 
updated: 2024-09-23
---

# FLIP 288: Simple String Interpolation

## Objective

This FLIP proposes adding support for simple string interpolation limited to identifiers only (no support for full expressions).

## Motivation

Currently Cadence has no support for string interpolation. It is convenient for developers to be able to inline variables in strings as opposed to the current solution of applying `concat` repeatedly. 

In general many languages support string interpolation for readability and ease-of-use. 

## User Benefit

Developers can avoid repeatedly using `concat` to generate strings which will simplify code and readability.

## Design Proposal

There are many possible implementations two of which are highlighted below. The main constraint is backward compatibility, existing Cadence 1.0 code cannot be affected.

### Python f-string syntax
Support the following:
```python
f"value is {value}"
```
This change is backwards compatible as it introduces a new class of strings.

### Swift \\()
Support the following:
```swift
"value is \(value)"
```

> This change is backwards compatible because `\(` is not currently a valid escape character. 

Reviewer 3: I think this part can go to "prior art" section. Here in the "Design Proposal" section, we need to present the design that "we" are proposing. For example, which syntax are we going to use in cadence, and what expressions would be supported (only variable references for now, but mention that this is extensible for other expressions in future),  types of the expressions (i.e: only string-typed expressions for now, again, can/will be extended in future), etc.

Author: Updated to choose a preferred design with more information on possible restrictions.

### Drawbacks

> None.

Reviewer 3: One drawback is if someone already has the interpolation notation already (`${}`, `{}`, or which ever we pick) in one of their existing string literals, then they would have to update their code. This is highly unlikely, but in theory that makes it not completely backward compatible in that sense.

However, we can pre-analyze all the existing deployed contracts, both mainnet, and testnet, to see whether there are any such cases though. And if not, then all good.

Author: I believe this should not be possible with a properly chosen interpolation notation so it was not mentioned, but it can be added if the notation changes.

Reviewer 3: that makes sense
